Location filter changed to match the design of other filters (#1809)
moq-wg/moq-transport: draft-ietf-moq-transport.md

Reviewer: "in the requested range" is a weird thing to say here, since the struct above doesn't have any sort of range. Better to say that a FETCH delivers all previously published objects, subject to any parameters that might constrain the set.

Author: Leaving to Ed's discretion. Maybe "requested range in the Location Filter parameter if present".

### Location Filters {#location-filters}

> Subscribers can specify a Location filter parameter on a subscription or fetch indicating to the publisher

Reviewer 2: FETCH already has mandatory Start Location / End Location fields. Does the parameter replace that range, intersect it, or is it invalid when both specify different ranges?

Author: WIP. Plan is to replace fetch fields or fetch itself. Discussions ongoing.

Author: Replaced FETCH location fields with Location Filter parameter.

> Subscribers can specify a Location filter parameter on a subscription or fetch indicating to the publisher

Reviewer 2: The existing LOCATION_FILTER Parameter section still only permits SUBSCRIBE, PUBLISH_OK, and subscription REQUEST_UPDATE. You may want to update that.

Author: WIP

Author: Added FETCH to allowed messages.

which Objects to send.  Subscriptions without a filter pass all Objects
published or received via upstream subscriptions.

A Location filter specifies an inclusive range of Locations.  Only objects
published or received via a subscription having Locations within the inclusive range
pass the filter.

Some Location filters are defined to be relative to the `Largest Object` which is
communicated in SUBSCRIBE_OK.  The `Largest Object` is the Object with the
largest Location ({{location-structure}}) in the
Track from the perspective of the publisher processing the message. Largest
Object updates when the first byte of an Object with a Location larger than the
previous value is published or received through a subscription.

A Location filter parameter has the following structure:

~~~
LOCATION_FILTER Parameter {
  Parameter Type (vi64) = 0x21,
  Length (vi64),
  [StartGroup (vi64),]
  [StartObject (vi64),]
  [EndGroupDelta (vi64),]

>   [EndObject (vi64),]

Reviewer 2: You may want to add some clarifying text on how this is decoded (two varints presumably mean absolute {StartGroup, StartObject}, three mean an end group with omitted EndObject, and four mean exact end object)

Author: WIP

Author: Agreed, updated.

~~~

If Length is zero, the Start Location is `{Largest Object.Group, Largest Object.Object + 1}`,
or {0,0} if no content has been delivered yet, and the subscription is open-ended.
Note that due to network reordering or prioritization, relays can receive Objects with
Locations smaller than `Largest Object` after the SUBSCRIBE is processed, but
these Objects do not pass this filter.

> If only StartGroup is present, it is a relative number of groups prior to the next group,

Reviewer 3: Just to make sure it the range with StartGroup is current group +1 and walk backwards .

If it is not the current group, is by default we express to fill fetch ?

Author: Fill fetch interaction is still TBD. It depends if people like a single range in Sub to Fill, or if they prefer separate Sub vs Fill ranges and parameters. This can work either way. But the semantics of what triggers a fill (single implicit range or separate explicit fill parameter) depend on the fill design.

Reviewer 3: makes sense @mzanaty My preference is to have them separate to keep the intent very clear.

Author: We're proposing separate location ranges in live Subscribe vs Fill parameter for cache fill/fetch. This will be detailed in PR#1673 not here, assuming we land 1809 before 1673.

### Location Filters {#location-filters}

> Subscribers can specify a Location filter parameter on a subscription or fetch

Reviewer 4: not sure we need to explicitly mention FETCH here, unless we're also going to add it to the next sentence "...without a filter"

Author: Updated "without a filter" too.

indicating to the publisher which Objects to send.  Subscriptions without a
filter pass all Objects published or received via upstream subscriptions.

A Location filter specifies an inclusive range of Locations.  Only objects
published or received via a subscription having Locations within the inclusive range

> pass the filter.

Reviewer 5: Maybe this suggestion is too simple, but the existing text is a bit odd, especially since this now applies to fetch.

```suggestion
with Locations within the inclusive range pass the filter.
```

Reviewer 4: +1 - the filter on a subscription has a particular meaning with respect to "newly published / received" objects, vs fetch, which isn't defining a "filter" so much as the bounds of that request.

Some Location filters are defined to be relative to the `Largest Object` which is

> communicated in SUBSCRIBE_OK.  The `Largest Object` is the Object with the

Reviewer 4: LARGEST_OBJECT is not communicated in FETCH_OK.

largest Location ({{location-structure}}) in the
Track from the perspective of the publisher processing the message.  `Largest
Object` updates when the first byte of an Object with a Location larger than the
previous value is published or received through a subscription.

> A Location filter parameter has the following length-prefixed structure:

Reviewer 4: Odd to have this defined here, and not in the parameters section, though I appreciate it's an easier review. I suppose the editors will bat cleanup after this lands.

Author: If there is a specific structure that applies only to a specific protocol element, I think it is much clearer to define both at the same time, rather than define a general structure unlinked to any protocol element and force the reader to find the protocol element context in which it applies. But eds/auths can use their discretion here.

~~~
LOCATION_FILTER Parameter {
  Parameter Type (vi64) = 0x21,
  Length (vi64),
  [StartGroup (vi64),]
  [StartObject (vi64),]
  [EndGroupDelta (vi64),]

>   [EndObject (vi64),]

Reviewer 4: I'll not that we at one time _explicitly_ agreed to remove end object filter from subscriptions, and this unified syntax is adding it back.  It's passed multiple consensus calls.  I don't have an objection to it, but it's probably worth noting. I believe @martinduke filed the original issue that lead to its removal.

Author: I recall this, but believe it was during simpler days when we thought it was easy to determine an entire group was delivered, before we had subgroups, gaps, filters, and other complexities. If Martin feels the old restriction still has value and is still needed, please reopen. A motivation for a full end location is Ian's suggestion to replace Forward with a Location filter with the exact end location to stop, even if in the past.

~~~

Length (in bytes) determines how many optional vi64 fields are present, 0 to 4.
Length can be 0 for no filter, e.g. to remove the filter in REQUEST_UPDATE.
Optional fields can be omitted consecutively from the end.  The options are:

>   * 1 vi64: StartGroup is present

Reviewer 4: I think numbering the options is confusing, because someone might interpret this as the number of bytes.  The length itself can vary fro 0 to 36.

Author: Agreed, will reword without numbers to avoid confusion with Length.

  * 2 vi64: StartGroup, StartObject are present
  * 3 vi64: StartGroup, StartObject, EndGroupDelta are present
  * 4 vi64: StartGroup, StartObject, EndGroupDelta, EndObject are present

> If only StartGroup is present, it is a relative number of groups prior to the next group,

Reviewer 4: Should we say 'next group' or 'Largest Object.Group + 1', since the 'next' Group could imply temporality (next to arrive) and/or skip a large range.

Author: Next Group/Object should be defined first in terms of Largest Object, then used in capitals later. Old text already had Next Group, so I think it's intuitive and good to keep.

hence the start Location is `{Largest Object.Group + 1 - StartGroup, 0}`. For example:
  * StartGroup=0 will start at the next group
  * StartGroup=1 will start at the current group
  * StartGroup=2 will start at 1 group prior to the current group

>   * StartGroup=N will start at N-1 groups prior to the current group

Reviewer 4: Need to explain what happens when LargestObject.Group == MAXINT or < N.

Author: Should we clamp computed group < 0 to 0 instead of error? If the sub asks for 1 group prior, but head is 0, should we clamp to 0 or error? I'm inclined to clamp to 0, since this seems like valid common app behavior to ask for 1 prior group when blind of head.

Author: Any guidance? If not, I will clamp to 0/maxint for under/overflow, rather than error. When blind of head, asking for Next Group or Prior Group do not seem like errors or protocol violations, so just clamp to valid.

If only StartGroup and StartObject are present and both 0, the start Location

> is the Next Object which is `{Largest Object.Group, Largest Object.Object + 1}`,

Reviewer 5: This works, but it feels overly clever and I can see it leading to programming errors.

I'm trying to think of a safer way to serialize this that isn't overly complex, but nothing is coming to mind right now.

Reviewer 4: Remove "Next Object" in favor of just the explicit math, which is unambiguous.  I share Ian's concern about the overly clever encoding, but probably overall simplification outweighs the concern?

I would add something like "because a an open-ended range beginning at 0,0 is equivalent to no filter..."

Author: I also dislike this but nothing simpler and clearer came to mind. Do we really even need this at all? It seems only joining fetch/fill cases need this to start sub and end fetch on head to avoid dupes. Any other use of this filter? If not, maybe we can remove it if joining fetch/fill can be expressed without it.

Reviewer 4: Auth/Ed vibe is that we probably don't want implicit joining fetch/fill-fetch behavior.

Add some warning guidance about the footgun here.

Author: I will leave 0,0 for now but add Alan's suggested text. I have ideas to remove it once fill/fetch lands.

or {0,0} if no content has been delivered yet.
Note that due to network reordering or prioritization, relays can receive Objects with
Locations smaller than `Largest Object` after the SUBSCRIBE is processed, but

> these Objects do not pass this filter.

Reviewer 5: I'm confused why this is relay specific?

Is there something special about Largest Object as a start?

Maybe we don't need this sentence?

Reviewer 4: I think this text has been around and maybe Mo just moved it?

It's not strictly relay specific (except the network reordering bit) - a relay publishing out of order could also hit the condition.  But for now, let's leave it alone.

Author: Existing text, not moved, just reflowed. I'm taking the above guidance as leave it alone.

> Otherwise, all start/end group/object fields are absolute.  EndGroupDelta is delta

Reviewer 5: You can't set the end Group/Object to Largest Object?  I'm not sure how useful that is, except the Joining Fetch type usecase?

Reviewer 4: Isn't that the inverse of joining fetch?  I want my subscribe to _end_ at live head?  I don't think we need this.

Reviewer 5: Fair point, no need for this.

encoded from StartGroup, but both the start and end groups are absolute, not
relative to `Largest Object`.  If StartGroup + EndGroupDelta exceeds 2^64 - 1,
the endpoint MUST close the session with a `PROTOCOL_VIOLATION`.

EndGroupDelta and EndObject can be omitted for an open-ended subscription

> or to end a fetch at the `Largest Object`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
EndGroupDelta and EndObject can be omitted for an open-ended subscription.
When they are omitted from a Fetch, the EndGroup and EndObject are 'Largest Object'.
```

Reviewer 4: Largest object or end of track

Author: At the end of a track, largest object = end of track, right? So largest object already covers all cases. Please reopen if I'm missing something.

which Objects to send.  Subscriptions without a filter pass all Objects
published or received via upstream subscriptions.

Fetch requests can also specify a Location filter.

A Location filter specifies an inclusive range of Locations.  Only objects
with Locations within the inclusive range pass the filter.

Some Location filters are defined to be relative to the `Largest Object`. The `Largest
Object` is the Object with the largest Location ({{location-structure}}) in the
Track from the perspective of the publisher processing the message. Largest
Object updates when the first byte of an Object with a Location larger than the
previous value is published or received through a subscription.

A Location filter parameter has the following length-prefixed structure:

~~~
LOCATION_FILTER Parameter {
  Parameter Type (vi64) = 0x21,
  Length (vi64),
  [StartGroup (vi64),]
  [StartObject (vi64),]
  [EndGroupDelta (vi64),]
  [EndObject (vi64),]
~~~

Length (in bytes) determines how many optional vi64 fields are present.

> Length can be 0 to indicate no filter, for example to remove the filter in REQUEST_UPDATE.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
A length of 0 indicates no filter, for example to remove the filter in REQUEST_UPDATE.
```

> Optional fields can be omitted consecutively from the end.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

  * If only one is present, it is StartGroup.
  * If only two are present, they are StartGroup and StartObject.

>   * If only three are present, they are StartGroup, StartObject, and EndGroupDelta.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  * If only one field is present, it is StartGroup.
  * If only two fields are present, they are StartGroup and StartObject.
  * If only three fields are present, they are StartGroup, StartObject, and EndGroupDelta.
```

If only StartGroup and StartObject are present and both 0, the start Location
is the Next Object which is `{Largest Object.Group, Largest Object.Object + 1}`,
or {0,0} if no content has been delivered yet.  To start at absolute Location {0, 0}
with no end, which is equivalent to unfiltered, do not include a Location Filter.
Note that due to network reordering or prioritization, relays can receive Objects with
Locations smaller than `Largest Object` after the SUBSCRIBE is processed, but
these Objects do not pass this filter.

If a relative start group results in a computed absolute group less than 0, the
computed value is set to 0; if greater than 2^64 - 1, it is set to 2^64 - 1.

Otherwise, all fields are absolute.  EndGroupDelta is delta
encoded from StartGroup, but both the start and end groups are absolute, not
relative to `Largest Object`.  If StartGroup + EndGroupDelta exceeds 2^64 - 1,
the endpoint MUST close the session with a `PROTOCOL_VIOLATION`.

EndGroupDelta and EndObject can be omitted for an open-ended subscription.
When they are omitted from a Fetch, the EndGroup and EndObject are `Largest Object`.

> EndObject can be omitted to include all objects in the End Group.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When EndGroupDelta and EndObject are omitted from a subscription filter, the
subscription is open-ended. When they are omitted from a Fetch, the
EndGroup and EndObject are `Largest Object`.

When EndObject is omitted, the filter includes all objects in the End Group.
```

which Objects to send.  Subscriptions without a filter pass all Objects
published or received via upstream subscriptions.

Fetch requests can also specify a Location filter.

A Location filter specifies an inclusive range of Locations.  Only objects
with Locations within the inclusive range pass the filter.

Some Location filters are defined to be relative to the `Largest Object`. The `Largest
Object` is the Object with the largest Location ({{location-structure}}) in the
Track from the perspective of the publisher processing the message. Largest
Object updates when the first byte of an Object with a Location larger than the
previous value is published or received through a subscription.

A Location filter parameter has the following length-prefixed structure:

~~~
LOCATION_FILTER Parameter {
  Parameter Type (vi64) = 0x21,
  Length (vi64),

>   [StartGroup (vi64),]

Reviewer 6: Start seems like a bad name. I think it more a count of Prior objects or groups that you add to current to get the StartGroup.

Author: StartGroup can be relative (if it's the only field present) or absolute (if more fields present). Need a name that works for both cases. Open to anything better.

  [StartObject (vi64),]
  [EndGroupDelta (vi64),]
  [EndObject (vi64),]
~~~

Length (in bytes) determines how many optional vi64 fields are present.
A length of 0 indicates no filter, for example to remove the filter in REQUEST_UPDATE.
  * If only one field is present, it is StartGroup.

>   * If only two fields are present, they are StartGroup and StartObject.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * If only two fields are present, they are StartGroup followed by StartObject.
```

Reviewer 4: I think it's clear from the text and the diagram what the order is.

>   * If only three fields are present, they are StartGroup, StartObject, and EndGroupDelta.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * If only three fields are present, they are StartGroup followed by StartObject, and EndGroupDelta.
```

Reviewer 4: same as above.

If only StartGroup is present, it is a relative number of groups prior to the Next Group,

> hence the start Location is `{Largest Object.Group + 1 - StartGroup, 0}`. For example:

Reviewer: This paragraph should explicit on what happens if there is no LargestObject, rather than relying on the examples below.

Author: Leaving to Ed's discretion.

Reviewer 3: I feel the filters applies only when there is a largest object, if not, we need to wait for largest object to be know to apply location filters. Not sure, if we need to state it explicitly. But i do, some clairifcaiton might not be harmful @afrind @ianswett  thoughts ?

Reviewer 4: @suhasHere that's an interesting idea.  I don't love the idea of deferring filter resolution.  I'd rather just default to Next Group or 0,0.  This is the case where no objects have been published yet.

Author: If no objects have been published, I think the correct resolution of any relative start is simply unfiltered. Nothing else makes sense, since there is no current group or prior groups, or any way to compute any relative group until an object is eventually published. Deferred resolution is an unnecessary burden that would anyway produce the wrong result. If you ask for Next Group when nothing was published, then finally object 5,0 is published, you would want to receive it, but deferred resolution would set Largest Object to 5,0 and Next Group to 6, so you would not get it. Unfiltered is what you likely want for a relative start if nothing published, to avoid the confusion in deferred resolution.

  * StartGroup=0 will start at the Next Group
  * StartGroup=1 will start at the current group
  * StartGroup=2 will start at 1 group prior to the current group

>   * StartGroup=N will start at N-1 groups prior to the current group

Reviewer 3: I wonder if we need to clarify 
StartGroup=N will start at N-1 groups prior to the current group, for N > 0

Reviewer 4: All N are greater than 0, not sure what you are saying

Author: The extra "for N>0" seems harmless, although perhaps superfluous. Should it be N>0 or N>1? Do you consider "0 groups prior to the current group" to be nonsensical or clearly mean current group? If the latter, we could also consider wording relative to next not current group to eliminate N-1: "StartGroup=N will start at N groups prior the Next Group".

> If only StartGroup and StartObject are present and both 0, the start Location

Reviewer: so how would I express the old NextGroupStart filter? I would think that would be (0, 0)!

Author: Just {0} so only StartGroup is present as stated immediately above.

is the Next Object which is `{Largest Object.Group, Largest Object.Object + 1}`,
or {0,0} if no content has been delivered yet.  To start at absolute Location {0, 0}
with no end, which is equivalent to unfiltered, do not include a Location Filter.
Note that due to network reordering or prioritization, relays can receive Objects with
Locations smaller than `Largest Object` after the SUBSCRIBE is processed, but
these Objects do not pass this filter.

> If a relative start group results in a computed absolute group less than 0, the

Reviewer 3: May be we don't needs this, since we are referring unsigned integers and it can't go less than 0 ?

Reviewer 4: @suhasHere the computed value can be less than 0 if current group is e.g. 10 and StartGroup is 20.

Author: The computed value depends on an unknown Largest Object (only known by the peer), so relative start can go negative.

computed value is set to 0; if greater than 2^64 - 1, it is set to 2^64 - 1.

Otherwise, all fields are absolute.  EndGroupDelta is delta
encoded from StartGroup, but both the start and end groups are absolute, not
relative to `Largest Object`.  If StartGroup + EndGroupDelta exceeds 2^64 - 1,
the endpoint MUST close the session with a `PROTOCOL_VIOLATION`.

When EndGroupDelta and EndObject are omitted from a subscription filter, the
subscription is open-ended. When they are omitted from a Fetch, the

> EndGroup and EndObject are `Largest Object`.

Reviewer: so IIUC, to Fetch from 0,0 to Largest Object, there is no filter at all? That would be a useful clarifying example.

Author: Correct, for standalone fetch. Joining fetch says you MUST provide a filter, but Ian wants to remove this so it behaves just like standalone fetch: unfiltered up to Largest Object (or Track End, which I guess is also Largest Object when the track ends.) I agree with Ian, remove the MUST, and Martin, add clarifying text for this unfiltered case.

> 

Reviewer: Also, it would seem that we've eliminated the ability to start an open-ended subscription at an arbitrary point in the future? Unless we set EndGroup = UINT64_MAX? If so, that's another useful clarifying example.

Author: Nothing was eliminated. The old AbsoluteStart filter is now {X,Y} where absolute group X can be in the future or past. Just give a start with no end.

which Objects to send.  Subscriptions without a filter pass all Objects
published or received via upstream subscriptions.

Fetch requests can also specify a Location filter.

A Location filter specifies an inclusive range of Locations.  Only objects
with Locations within the inclusive range pass the filter.

Some Location filters are defined to be relative to the `Largest Object`. The `Largest
Object` is the Object with the largest Location ({{location-structure}}) in the
Track from the perspective of the publisher processing the message. Largest
Object updates when the first byte of an Object with a Location larger than the
previous value is published or received through a subscription.
Next Object is defined as {Largest Object.Group, Largest Object.Object + 1}.

> Next Group is defined as {Largest Object.Group + 1, 0}.

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure these are needed.  Both references below explicitly give the Location math.

Author: Removed

A Location filter parameter has the following length-prefixed structure:

~~~
LOCATION_FILTER Parameter {
  Parameter Type (vi64) = 0x21,
  Length (vi64),
  [StartGroup (vi64),]
  [StartObject (vi64),]
  [EndGroupDelta (vi64),]
  [EndObject (vi64),]
~~~

Length (in bytes) determines how many optional vi64 fields are present.

> Length can be 0 for no filter to remove the filter in REQUEST_UPDATE.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Length can be 0 to indicate no filter, for example to remove the filter in REQUEST_UPDATE.
```

  * If only three are present, they are StartGroup, StartObject, and EndGroupDelta.

If only StartGroup is present, it is a relative number of groups prior to the Next Group,
hence the start Location is `{Largest Object.Group + 1 - StartGroup, 0}`. For example:
  * StartGroup=0 will start at the Next Group
  * StartGroup=1 will start at the current group
  * StartGroup=2 will start at 1 group prior to the current group
  * StartGroup=N will start at N-1 groups prior to the current group

If only StartGroup and StartObject are present and both 0, the start Location
is the Next Object which is `{Largest Object.Group, Largest Object.Object + 1}`,
or {0,0} if no content has been delivered yet.  To start at absolute Location {0, 0}
with no end, which is equivalent to unfiltered, do not include a Location Filter.
Note that due to network reordering or prioritization, relays can receive Objects with
Locations smaller than `Largest Object` after the SUBSCRIBE is processed, but
these Objects do not pass this filter.

If a relative start group results in a computed absolute group less than 0, the
computed value is set to 0; if greater than 2^64 - 1, it is set to 2^64 - 1.

> Otherwise, all start/end group/object fields are absolute.  EndGroupDelta is delta

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Otherwise, all fields are absolute.  EndGroupDelta is delta
```

> encoded from StartGroup, but both the start and end groups are absolute, not

Reviewer 4: So there's no encoding of "5 groups before and 5 groups after largest object".  I think this is fine, since you can say "5 groups before + open ended" and then REQUEST_UPDATE to set your end.

Author: Correct

### LOCATION FILTER Parameter {#location-filter}

The LOCATION_FILTER parameter (Parameter Type 0x21) uses length-prefixed
encoding. It MAY appear in a FETCH, SUBSCRIBE, PUBLISH_OK or REQUEST_UPDATE (for a
subscription) message. It is a Location Filter (see {{location-filters}}).

If omitted from FETCH, SUBSCRIBE or PUBLISH_OK, the subscription is

> unfiltered.  If omitted from REQUEST_UPDATE, the value is unchanged.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
If omitted from FETCH, SUBSCRIBE or PUBLISH_OK, the subscription or Fetch
is unfiltered.  If omitted from REQUEST_UPDATE, the value is unchanged.
```

Reviewer 4: Again, not sure referring to fetch without location = unfiltered is the right framing.  Better to say, it includes the entire track from the beginning to end or largest object.

Author: Unfiltered (no location filter) = beginning to end, seems equivalent. Unfiltered seems like the right framing, similar to HTTP range requests, you get the entire resource/track.

  (subscriber)` states, it MUST return a REQUEST_ERROR with error code
  `INVALID_JOINING_REQUEST_ID`.

A Location Filter parameter (see {{location-filters}}) MUST be included
to specify the joining start Location as a relative or absolute value,
described below.

#### Joining Fetch Range Calculation

> The `Largest Object` value from the corresponding

Reviewer 4: Why did we lose joining location in this PR?  Isn't it still needed?

Author: Agreed, while equivalent, there is no need for this change, so I will revert.

subscription is used to calculate the end of a Joining Fetch, so the
Objects retrieved by the FETCH and SUBSCRIBE are contiguous and non-overlapping.

The publisher receiving a Joining Fetch sets the End Location to

> `Largest Object` (see {{subscriptions}}.

Reviewer 5: I think you want to keep the old text here.  The goal of a Joining Fetch is to set the End Location to the same as the start of the Subscription being joined.

Author: The old text explains the +1 hack in fetch locations which was needed to reserve Obj ID 0 to mean "all objects in the group". End Obj ID is now optional, so it can be omitted instead of reserving 0 to mean "all objects in the group". So the special 0 / +1 hack is gone.

  (subscriber)` states, it MUST return a REQUEST_ERROR with error code
  `INVALID_JOINING_REQUEST_ID`.

A Location Filter parameter (see {{location-filters}}) MUST be included
to specify the joining start Location as a relative or absolute value,
described below.  If a publisher receives a Joining Fetch with no Location Filter parameter,

> it MUST close the session with `PROTOCOL_VIOLATION`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

  (subscriber)` states, it MUST return a REQUEST_ERROR with error code
  `INVALID_JOINING_REQUEST_ID`.

> A Location Filter parameter (see {{location-filters}}) MUST be included

Reviewer 5: I think having no Location filter should start from the beginning of a Track, so there's no reason for this extra MUST.

Author: Agreed, MUST removed

  (subscriber)` states, it MUST return a REQUEST_ERROR with error code
  `INVALID_JOINING_REQUEST_ID`.

A Location Filter parameter (see {{location-filters}}) MUST be included
to specify the joining start Location as a relative or absolute value,

> described below.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
described below.  If a publisher receives a Joining Fetch with no Location Filter parameter,
it MUST close the session with `PROTOCOL_VIOLATION`.
```

Objects retrieved by the FETCH and SUBSCRIBE are contiguous and non-overlapping.

The publisher receiving a Joining Fetch sets the End Location to
the Joining Location (see {{subscriptions}}.

Note: the last Object included in the Joining FETCH response is the Object
at the Joining Location.

For a Relative Joining Fetch, the publisher sets the Start Location to

> {Joining Location.Group + 1 - StartGroup, 0}.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{Joining Location.Group + 1 - StartGroup, 0} or {0, 0} if the Start Location's group
would be less than zero.
```

Objects retrieved by the FETCH and SUBSCRIBE are contiguous and non-overlapping.

The publisher receiving a Joining Fetch sets the End Location to
the Joining Location (see {{subscriptions}}.

Note: the last Object included in the Joining FETCH response is the Object
at the Joining Location.

For a Relative Joining Fetch, the publisher sets the Start Location to

> {Joining Location.Group + 1 - StartGroup, 0}.

Reviewer 4: Is StartGroup ambiguous in this context?  There's an encoding on the wire, which could be 0, and then there's the resolved value.

Author: StartGroup is the structure/wire value. The resolved value is called Start Location, not StartGroup. So there should be no ambiguity.

The Object Forwarding Preference does not apply to fetches.

> Fetch includes a Location Filter parameter

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Fetch can include a Location Filter parameter (see {{location-filters}})
```

which specifies an inclusive range of Objects starting at Start Location and

> ending at End Location.

Reviewer 7: This doesn't seem to be correct anymore?  An absolute fetch can have any filter, or no filter at all.

> Objects with Locations larger than the `Largest Object` will not be retrieved by a FETCH.  If the

Reviewer 7: `Largest Object` at the moment request is processed?

> Objects with Locations larger than the `Largest Object` will not be retrieved by a FETCH.  If the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Objects with Locations larger than the `Largest Object` at the time the request
is processed will not be retrieved by a FETCH.  If the
```

The Object Forwarding Preference does not apply to fetches.

Fetch includes a Location Filter parameter
which specifies an inclusive range of Objects starting at Start Location and
ending at End Location.

> Locations larger than the `Largest Object` will not be retrieved by a FETCH.  If the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Objects with Locations larger than the `Largest Object` will not be retrieved by a FETCH.  If the
```

* End Of Track: 1 if all Objects have been published on this Track, and
  the End Location is the final Object in the Track, 0 if not.

> * End Location: The end of the range covered by the FETCH response.

Reviewer 4: I think I had to write 3 PRs to get the above text to resolve all the issues people had with it.

It looks like you are removing a special syntax from FETCH which was `FETCH Start=10,0 End=10,0` => fetch all of group 10.  Now you need `FETCH Location Param={10,0,0,MAXINT}`?  I'm not overly upset but we should run by the wg?

Reviewer 4: Another option - make the end _exclusive_ and the way to fetch all of group 10 collapses to FETCH 10,0 11,0.

I had suggested this way back when but folks we unenthused as I recall.

Author: The fetch end object ID=0 hack to mean "all objects in the group" (and the resulting +1 actual location confusion) is no longer needed since end object ID is optional and can be omitted for "all objects in the group".

  This is the End Location from the FETCH request Location Filter unless
  the requested range extends beyond published data.
  If End Location is smaller than the Start Location in the corresponding FETCH

>   request Location Filter, the receiver MUST close the session with a `PROTOCOL_VIOLATION`.

Reviewer 4: Since end is delta encoded, this is no longer possible, though the delta being larger than 2^64 is.  I think it's covered well enough elsewhere though.

Author: I think this means End Location in Fetch OK compared to Start Location in Fetch, so no delta encoding there.

* End Of Track: 1 if all Objects have been published on this Track, and
  the End Location is the final Object in the Track, 0 if not.

* End Location: The end of the range covered by the FETCH response.

>   This is the End Location from the FETCH request Location Filter unless

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  This is the End Location from the FETCH request Location Filter parameter unless
```

* End Of Track: 1 if all Objects have been published on this Track, and
  the End Location is the final Object in the Track, 0 if not.

* End Location: The end of the range covered by the FETCH response.
  This is the End Location from the FETCH request Location Filter unless

>   the requested range extends beyond Largest Object or the last Object in the Track.

Reviewer 7: > the End Location from the FETCH request Location Filter

Replace this with something along the lines of "the Location of the last object that matches the Location Filter at the time the FETCH request is processed".

>   the requested range extends beyond Largest Object or the last Object in the Track.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  the requested range extends beyond Largest Object at the time
  the request was processed, or the last Object in the Track.
```

* End Of Track: 1 if all Objects have been published on this Track, and
  the End Location is the final Object in the Track, 0 if not.

* End Location: The end of the range covered by the FETCH response.
  This is the End Location from the FETCH request Location Filter unless

>   the requested range extends beyond published data.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  the requested range extends beyond Largest Object or the last Object in the Track.
```
